Questions and Answers from the Application Form
===============================================

1. Describe the world as it is. (A description of the status quo and
   context in which you will be working, max 1500 ch)

Scientists spend an increasing amount of time building and using
software. However, most of them are never actually taught how to do
this --- they pick up bits and pieces by osmosis and good luck. As a
result, they spend a lot of time reinventing wheels (or spinning their
own), and it takes them weeks or months to do things they could in
hours or days.  When they're done, they often have no idea how
trustworthy their results are, and may not even be able to reproduce
them.

The most frightening thing of all is that most scientists don't even
know how big the gap is between the way they work and the way they
could and should work.  Big data gets all the attention, but it's
small, everyday skills that scientists need most.

And while attention is focused these days on sharing data and code,
there's something else researchers don't share: their lessons, and how
they teach them.  Millions of people have contributed to Wikipedia,
and to tens of thousands of open source software projects, but lessons
are almost always still written by one or two people.  While people
routinely borrow PowerPoint slides they find on the Internet, they
almost never send patches back to improve the original.  They might
put their lessons in an open access repository, but the "mend and
extend" ethos that is the basis of truly open collaboration simply
isn't part of most educators' thinking.

2. What change do you want to make?  (A description of what you want
   to change about the status quo, in the world, your personal vision
   for this area, max 1500 ch)

I want every scientist to learn the equivalent of basic lab skills for
scientific computing.  I want them to automate tasks instead of
repeatedly pointing and clicking, to use version control to track and
share their work, to be able to re-run published experiments without
heroic effort, and to know whether their code is probably correct or
not.  I don't want them all to become professional software engineers;
instead, I want them to be able to do routine things on their own, and
work with professional developers when they need to.

But I don't just want scientists to be able to compute better: I want
them to be able to *collaborate* better.  The scientists I meet today
no longer ask, "Why should I be open?" but rather, "How do I actually
do that?"  And once they know why and how to collaborate out in the
open, I want them to do that in their teaching as well, because I
think that openness in one area accelerates and reinforces openness in
others.

Equally, I don't just want scientists to share what they have: I want
them to improve what *everyone* has.  Code review's benefits have been
known since the 1970s, but it didn't become popular until globally
distributed collaboration on open source came along.  Once that
happened, tens of thousands of programmers started benefiting from
each other's insights.  I think the same can happen with teaching once
people are used to working out in the open, and that we'll all be
better off for it.

3. What do you want to explore?  (Describe the innovations or
   questions you would like to explore during the fellowship year, max
   1500 ch)

We've already proven that our current approach really does help
scientists get more done in less time and with less pain.  I want to
explore how we can do this better, but also how we can apply what
we've learned more broadly.

I want to keep teaching scientists, but what I want to teach them is
how to pass better skills on to their colleagues.  More importantly, I
want to show them that all these same ideas can be applied to
creating, sharing, and maintaining teaching materials.  Open education
shouldn't mean "I can use your slides", but rather, "We can all work
together to make those slides (and exercises, and videos) better for
everyone."  The technical and social tools for doing this, like
version control and code review, have been around for years; I think
they can help educators just as much as they've helped programmers,
but somebody has to get the ball rolling.

Finally, I think that if people start collaborating on material,
they'll be more likely to share good practices with each other, just
as programmers who collaborate on open source projects pick up good
practices like test-driven development.  Educational researchers know
a lot about teaching and learning that isn't yet part of mainstream
practice; equally, a lot of good ideas are stuck in the classroom of
the teacher who invented them because there's no way for her to share
them.  I think open collaboration could help us fix both problems at
once.

4. What are you going to do to get there?  (A description of what you
   actually plan to do during the year, max 1500 ch)

a) I will focus on training Software Carpentry instructors rather than
   on teaching workshops.  More specifically, I will train at least
   200 new instructors during the course of the first year of this
   fellowship.

b) I will build open source tools to support collaborative
   construction of teaching materials.  This will include development
   of human-editable but machine-readable templates for lessons, tools
   for checking the consistency and prerequisites of lessons based on
   their definitions of key concepts, and training materials to show
   people who *aren't* programmers how to use open source techniques
   (such as incremental patching and threaded review) to collaborate
   on lesson development.

c) I will do for education what Software Carpentry has done for
   computing skills.  Specifically, I will create a course and a
   written guide to evidence-based best practices in teaching and
   learning (tentatively titled) "What Everyone in Science and
   Technology Absolutely, Positively Must Know About Education"), and
   make it freely available under the Creative Commons - Attribution
   license.

5. Does your idea/project have a name?

Yes

   Project/Idea Name

Software Carpentry

6. How does your idea relate to openness?

Matthew Crawford once wrote, "Too often, the defenders of free markets
forget that what we really want is free men."  Similarly, I think that
many advocates of open science data sometimes forget that it is just a
means to an end.  The real goal is to allow everyone, everywhere, to
work together without hindrance.  Openness is necessary for that, but
not sufficient: people must have the skills to actually *do* open for
it to be meaningful.  Software Carpentry fosters openness by giving
people what they need to implement it, and by explaining the ideas
behind those tools, helps people understand why and how open is
better.  Once these ideas take hold, and once people see that they
apply not just to research but also to teaching, I believe they will
find ways to apply them in domains we haven't thought of and ways we
can't yet imagine.

7. Have you started implementation of the idea?

Yes

   If so, please provide details on organisational structure, life
   cycle and progress (max 1500 ch)

Software Carpentry ran its first class at Los Alamos National
Laboratory in 1998.  Since 2010, it has grown into a volunteer
organization with over 165 instructors in 19 countries, who have
taught more than 100 two-day workshops for more than 5000 people in
the last year alone.  In October 2014, we began work to set up a
non-profit Software Carpentry Foundation (see
http://software-carpentry.org/blog/2014/10/announcing-the-creation-of-the-software-carpentry-foundational.html).
Its interim board will dissolve itself and be replaced by a permanent
board early in 2015.  If this fellowship is awarded, I will step down
as project lead in order to concentrate on this work.

As well as running workshops, Software Carpentry also runs an
instructor training course to teach scientists (many of them workshop
alumni) the basics of educational psychology and instructional design,
and how to apply ideas from both to teach other scientists how to
program.  More than 60 people are currently taking part in the
eleventh online offering of this training, and we are now also
offering intensive two- and three-day compressed versions on site in
Europe, North America, and Australia.

Software Carpentry's teaching materials are all freely available under
the Creative Commons - Attribution license.  They are hosted on
GitHub, and are proof that open collaboration on lessons can work: the
most recent versions have had over a hundred contributors in the last
two years.

8. How have you funded your initiative in the past?

Other

   Funding Details (max 1500 ch)

Software Carpentry has been supported by a wide range of organizations
over the years, from universities and national laboratories through
philanthropic foundations and private companies --- please see
http://software-carpentry.org/pages/sponsors.html for a complete
list.

Since January 2012, Software Carpentry has used a hybrid funding model
in which workshop hosts (typically universities) cover the travel and
accommodation costs of instructors, but central costs (such as
curriculum development and instructor training) are covered from
grants and donations.  This has allowed us to scale our workshops to
the point where instructor training is now our biggest bottleneck.

9. Who are your current or potential key partners?

I am working with a 

10. Do you intend to implement the idea as a for profit or not for
    profit initiative in the future?

Not for profit

11. Where will you be based during the fellowship?

    Base Country

Canada

    Base City

Toronto

12. Where will you implement your idea?

Other country or city

    Project Country

Many, including online

    Project City

Many, including online

13. Do you have an online presence?

Yes

    Please Provide Links to your Web Presence/s

http://third-bit.com (personal web site)
http://aosabook.org
http://sensibleadventures.com

14. Does the idea/project have an online presence?

Yes

    Please Provide Links to your Project/Idea's Web Presence/s

http://software-carpentry.org

15. How did you hear about the Shuttleworth Foundation Fellowship Program?

Current/Past Fellow

16. Have you applied for a Shuttleworth Foundation Fellowship in a previous round?

No

17. Upload Resume

Attached.

18. Video URL

TBD.
