Shuttleworth Foundation Fellowship Proposal October 2014
========================================================

Hi.  My name is Greg Wilson.  For the last sixteen years, I've been
teaching scientists how to use computers to do more research in less
time, and with less pain.  More recently, I've been teaching them how
to teach each other those skills.  I'd like you to help me do more of
that, and by doing so, to make the open source ethos of "mend and
extend" normal in teaching.

My starting point, back in the 1990s, was the realization that giving
the average scientist a supercomputer is like giving a teenager who
can barely get a family four-door out of the driveway the keys to a
Ferrari.  Most scientists are never actually taught how to program ---
or how to test code, or use version control, or any of the other
things that programmers do to make their lives easier.  As a result,
it takes them weeks or months to do things that could be done in
hours or days, and they have no idea when they're finished how
trustworthy their results are, or even how to reproduce them.

To fix this, I co-founded a project called Software Carpentry.  Its
aim, then and now, was to teach scientists all the things that work so
well that computer scientists take them for granted.  After a few ups
and downs, I rebooted the project in 2010.  Since then, it's grown
into a volunteer organization with more than 150 instructors in 19
countries.  In the last year alone, we've run two-day workshops for
over 7000 researchers, and we're set to double those numbers in the
coming two years.

But that's not the only interesting thing we're doing, and to explain
the rest, I need to talk about what happened between those early
workshops and 2010.  During that time, I started running capstone
projects for undergraduates in computer science at the University of
Toronto.  That eventually turned into a full-time teaching position,
and into a growing sense of frustration.  You see, I was supposed to
be teaching students software architecture, but none of the dozens of
books with those words in their titles described the actual
architectures of real programs.  They talked about the importance of
having a good architecture, and how to describe one, but when it came
time for examples, there was nothing there.

To fix that, I got three dozen of the best programmers in the world to
create an award-winning book called "Beautiful Code".  A couple of
years later, I got people in academia to describe key results from
empirical studies in software engineering in another book called
"Making Software", and more recently, I've been managing a series of
books called "The Architecture of Open Source Applications", in which
the lead designers of major open source projects describe how their
programs are put together.

All of this left me with a question: why aren't we creating teaching
materials the same way we're writing encyclopedias and creating
software?  Millions of people have contributed to Wikipedia, and tens
of thousands of open source software projects merge changes every day,
but lessons are almost always still written by one or two people.
They might live in an open access repository, but there's no culture
of "mend and extend": people routinely use each other's slides as a
starting point for their own, but the idea of submitting patches to
strengthen the original is completely foreign, even to people who
routinely do it with code.

Software Carpentry is proof that this can work.  Our lessons are the
end result of hundreds of changes by dozens of people, and are
stronger for it.  More importantly, working on lessons together is
helping to foster peer-to-peer sharing of good teaching practices,
just as working on open source software projects is helping thousands
of programmers pass on their insights to the next generation.

And since I've mentioned good teaching practices, this is probably the
right time to talk about the other big thing I've learned from
Software Carpentry in the last four and a half years.  After our
reboot in 2010, I tried running Software Carpentry as an online
course. I was disappointed and puzzled in equal measure by how badly
it worked, so in 2011 I finally did something I should have done years
ago: I took some time to actually learn something myself about
education.

The irony, of course, was that I was in the same position with respect
to teaching that most scientists are in with respect to programming.
Like most people, I thought that since I'd been in a lot of classes, I
knew how to teach well, but that's like saying that haivng been on a
lot of plane flights automatically qualified me to be a pilot.  What I
learned in that year of reading is that we actually know a lot as a
species about how people learn and how to teach them --- it's just
that most of us don't know what we know, and therefore don't act on
it.

So, in 2012 I started running an instructor training course to teach
our volunteers the basics of educational psychology and instructional
design so that they could teach more effectively, and also so that we
could have a more informed conversation about what "teaching
effectively" actually means.  Over a hundred people went through this
training last year, and while there were a lot of rough patches along
the way, most of them think it was valuable.

I would now like to spend a year doing this full-time.  I'd like to
spend a year teaching scientists how to teach one another as a way to
find out if we can get people to apply the open source way of doing
things to teaching.  Can we get hundreds or thousands of scientists to
collaborate on creating and reviewing lessons --- not just using them,
but making them?  And if they do this, will it help them understand
how to use the tools we want them to use in their research, and that
open collaboration is just a better way to do almost everything?

Terry Pratchett once said, "If you build a man a fire, you'll keep him
warm for a night.  If you set a man on fire, you'll keep him warm for
the rest of his life."  With your help, I think I can set thousands of
scientists on fire, and by doing so, figure out how to bring open
source collaboration to a whole new audience.  I hope you'll be as
excited by this as I am --- thank you for listening.
